1. Study the following situa4ons. In each of them, which of the main security objec4ves
are probably not fulﬁlled?
a. You have selected your favourite red ﬁlament for 3D prin4ng in an e-shop, now
entering your payment data and receiving an error message: "The transac4on
could not be completed, your bank is not responding, try later". Conﬁden4ality
b. You are siIng at a conference, listening to presenta4ons of other researchers
in the area you are keen on. You see one of them explaining your breakthrough
ideas you never shared with anyone except that you have submiKed them with
a recent EU project proposal that happened to be rejected. Conﬁden4ality and
integrity

c. Yesterday, you have completed the design of your new 3D model with Tinkercad.
When you have logged into Tinkercad today, you found your model to be
modiﬁed for unknown reasons. Integrity
2. An employee in the bank has been preparing 10 years for this beau4ful day. The plan
was perfect. Some large sum of money has been forgoKen on some unused account probably of a vic4m of a maﬁa war. Now they are safely moved to his private account in
Belize. Unfortunately, a day aUer, the police knock on the door. You know why because
you have programmed the informa4on system for this bank. Which property does it
have?
-

Non-repudia4on property -> evidence that they transferred money from an
unused account to private one.

3. System calls are a typical example of a weak point of opera4ng systems. They can be
used by an adversary to take control over otherwise protected parts of memory,
hardware, or other resources. It can be done, because an adversary program can oﬀer
a subs4tute rou4ne to be called when user programs trap to system calls. Your
comments.
-

System calls are poten4al weak point in OS -> they can be exploited by adversaries
to gain control over protected resources -> signiﬁcant security risk

4. Under linux, a user some4mes cannot hear anything when playing music with his
favorite music player (mplayer program) even though it has speakers connected and
volume up. This can happen for instance when that user is not member of the audio
user group. We give him this privilege by adding him to that group. Fill in the following
generic concepts with en44es for this par4cular situa4on:
a. Principal -> the user who needs access to the audio func4onality (ex. “John
Doe”)
b. Agent -> administra4ve command or ac4on that adds “John Doe” to “audio” user
group.
c. Object -> “audio” user group, resource that “John Doe” needs access to in order
to use audio func4onality
d. Creden4al -> privileges associated with the “audio” user group (OS checks
begore gaining access to audio resources)
5. A ci4zen who was banned from geIng certain kind of permission from regulators
no4ces that when the clerk in the oﬃce gives this permission to others, they always use
certain

URL

address

in

this

format:

hKps://permission-

server.gov/give_permission?personal_id=####&type_of_permission=#### Therefore
he tried to enter this URL to his web browser with his personal_id, and the type of
permission that he would like to have, but does not. Fortunately, it did not work out,
because systems obey one of the core security principles? Which one?
-

principle of least privilege (users and processes should only be given the minimum
levels of access and permissions necessary to perform their tasks)

6. What is the purpose of salt in hashing passwords process on a typical Linux system?
-

Linux systems can improve overall security and conﬁden4ality of user creden4als.

7. Provide 6 (in total) meaningful, useful, true and informa4ve sentences about
*advantages and/or disadvantages* of the three authen4ca4on methods:
a. by what you know:
o +: easily remembered and cheap passwords to implement, quick and easy
authen4ca4on for users

o -: Easy to guess password, dic4onary aKacks and social engineering, weak or
reused passwords
b. by what you have:
o +: addi4onal security (not only usernames and passwords), physical tokens
o -: imprac4cal to use physical tokens -> can be lost or stolen
c. by what you are:
o +: ﬁngerprints, iris paKerns, faceid, diﬃcult to replicate
o -: cannot be changed like passwords or tokens, harder to use on mul4ple
devices
8. When a user is logging in to a Linux desktop system on a text terminal, it sees the login:
prompt ﬁrst. AUer the user provides his username and password, the login process that
runs with superuser privileges veriﬁes the entered hashed password against a hashed
password stored in /etc/shadow ﬁle. If they match, it forks a new process, changes the
owner of that process to the user that is just logging in and starts a login shell as
speciﬁed in /etc/passwd ﬁle. Your comments.
-

Most important part is proper authen4ca4on and access control in the OS. If it is
done correctly, it ensures the security and integrity of the system

9. Why do we typically start a webserver as some user and not as a root?
-

If webserver would have full root privileges, some system-wide damage or
unauthorised changes could occur

10. Somebody wanted to enter a hairdresser during pandemic and pulled out her covidpass so that they let her in. Will her entry permission be based on capabili4es or on
access control list? Explain why.
-

Based on capabili4es -> capabili4es work like key in a lock

-

Covid-pass -> capability that grants permission for entry based on certain criteria
(test results, vaccina4on)

11. What is the rela4on between SSL and TLS and between HTTPS and SSL?
-

SSL (Secure Socket Layer) and TLS (Transport Layer Security):

o SSL: cryptographic protec4on to communica4ons between processes in
modern systems
o TSL: more secure and updated version of SSL, standard method for providing
secure communica4on over a network
-

HTTPS (Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure) and SSL:
o HTTPS: protocol that supports WWW, takes exis4ng HTTP and connects it to
SSL or TLS -> ensuring that sensi4ve informa4on transmiKed over the web is
protected from poten4al security threads

12. What are the diﬀerent ways to authen4cate when using SSH?
-

Password-based, public-key, A. servers (f.ex Kerberos)

13. A process P on a typical Linux system opens a ﬁle F, then reads from it 3 4mes, and
ﬁnally closes it. Which of the following was used:
a. Capabili4es
b. ACL

14. Suppose you have a family bakery, and diﬀerent people are working there: bakers,
juniors, cleaning staﬀ and others. Juniors have access to the ﬂour, while bakers can get
into the cabinet that contains hereditary recipes. In a corona crisis, some bakers were
ill and trusuul juniors temporarily received the privileges of the bakers un4l they could
return. How is this access control method called and what basic security principle does
this preserve?
-

Role-based access control (RBAC) and basic security principle of least privilege

15. Can a similar access control be achieved somehow in Linux system? Using which
technique and how does it work?
-

It can, by Access Control Lists and groups -> feature: privilege escala4on -> allows
small extensions of privileges

16. What command on Linux could we use to start a process under a diﬀerent user?
-

sudo -u <username> <command>

17. You have installed some new program on your mobile phone and it asks you to let it use
your microphone. What data structure will hold the decision of your approval?
-

Permissions label

18. A browser is accessing a webserver that is providing the content in encrypted form to
increase security. Why does the server need a cer4ﬁcate?
-

the server needs a cer4ﬁcate to authen4cate its iden4ty, establish a secure
encrypted connec4on, ensure data integrity, and build trust with the client browser

19. How can that webserver obtain such cer4ﬁcate?
-

Generate cer4ﬁcate signing request (CSR)

-

submit the CSR to Cer4ﬁcate authority (CA)

-

valida4on process

-

cer4ﬁcate insurance

-

installa4on on the web server

20. Suppose an adversary would like to cheat the web browser by recording a traﬃc
between the webserver and the browser ﬁrst and then reusing this recorded
communica4on to modify the content of the following communica4on. How is such a
wrongdoing called? What is done to prevent it?
-

“man-in-the-middle aKack”

-

The adversary posi4ons themselves between the client and server intercepts the
communica4on and can alter the data being exchanged

-

We can take some measures:
o Encrypt the communica4on between the client and server
o Cer4ﬁcate valida4on -> client can detect unauthorised or forget cer4ﬁcates
o A framework for secure communica4on by using digital cer4ﬁcates and
public private key pairs
o SSL/ TLS ->secure communica4on channels by encryp4ng data and ensuring
data integrity

21. you have ﬁles A, B, C and users X, Y, Z, W. You would like to give read and write access
to these ﬁles to the users as follows (other users should not have it):
ﬁle

users to have read access

users who have write access

A

XY

XW

B

XZ

YX

C

YZ

ZW

Can this be done in tradi4onal 9-bit POSIX-like access control? If yes, how, if not why?
-

It cannot be done, because the access control requirements involve speciﬁc
combina4ons of users having read and write access to each ﬁle which cannot be
directly achieved with tradi4onal POSIX model

22. One of the customers of a system you developed has ordered a Christmas tree to be
brought right to his door using that system. Now he is refusing to pay for it, claiming he
has not placed the order. However, you are 100% sure that he did that and you can
provide a proof. It means that your system has the following property: (ﬁll in)
-

Non-repudia4on

23. You have opened your program and commented-out lines 10-20 in it. Then you saved
it, compiled it, and run it, surprisingly ﬁnding out that the program s4ll executes those
instruc4ons at lines 10-20. You open the ﬁle and you see the lines are NOT commentedout. Which property is the system you are using lacking? (ﬁll in)
-

Integrity property

24. A teacher has developed a special program to tacitly subscribe students to his elec4ve
course that nobody wanted to register for. Somehow he managed to start and keep that
program running on a student computer, wai4ng un4l the student will have logged in
to AIS. AUer that his program would just issue a few needed requests to AIS and the
student would be silently registered. If this was possible, which core security principle
was not obeyed by such AIS?
-

Authoriza4on

25. Under Linux, when you are trying to send a program to Arduino over serial cable, you
run into a diﬃculty - you are missing the rights to ﬁle /dev/KyUSB0 or similar. When we
give a user this right, ﬁll in the following generic concepts with en44es in this situa4on:
a. Principal -> user
b. Agent ->program / tool
c. Object -> ﬁle /dev/KyUSB0 or serial port
d. Creden4al -> permissions or rights
26. Why does an experienced aKacker who has stolen password ﬁle from a machine you
use, and who wants to guess your password has an easier job if the "salt" is not used?
-

By not using a salt when hashing passwords, the security of the passwords is
weakened, making it easier for aKackers to guess passwords through various
techniques like dic4onary aKacks, rainbow table lookups, and iden4fying common
passwords across mul4ple users. Sal4ng passwords adds randomness and
uniqueness to each hashed password, making it signiﬁcantly harder for aKackers to
crack passwords even if they have access to the hashed passwords

27. When a user is logging in to a Linux desktop system on a text terminal, it sees the login:
prompt ﬁrst. AUer the user provides his username and password, the login process
changes its own user to the provided one so that it can read and verify the hashed
password from a ﬁle, which is stored in an area that is readable only to that user. Your
comments.
-

the process of changing the user to the provided one during login in a Linux system
enhances security by ensuring secure access to hashed password ﬁles, following the
principle of least privilege, isola4ng user data, and facilita4ng the authen4ca4on
veriﬁca4on process

28. What is the main advantage and main disadvantage of using capabili4es instead of ACL?
-

+: Fine-grained control and ﬂexibility in managing access to resources

-

-: they require careful design and handling to ensure that the right set if privileges
is assigned to each process or entry

29. Capabili4es allow both mandatory and discre4onary access control, whereas ACL allow
only mandatory. True?
-

False -> it depends on speciﬁc security requirements and policies of the system

30. Suppose you have a family bakery, and diﬀerent people are working there: bakers,
juniors, cleaning staﬀ and others. Juniors have access to the ﬂour, while bakers can get
into the cabinet that contains hereditary recipes. In a corona crisis, some bakers were
ill and trusuul juniors temporarily received the privileges of the bakers un4l they could
return. How is this access control method called and what basic security principle does
this preserve?
-

Role-based access control, principle of least privilege

