





Mechanism: Limited Direct Execution


In order to virtualize the CPU, the operating system needs to somehow share the physical CPU among many jobs running seemingly at the same time. The basic idea is simple: run one process for a little while, then run another one, and so forth. By time sharing the CPU in this manner, virtualization is achieved.
   There are a few challenges, however, in building such virtualization machinery. The first is performance: how can we implement virtualiza- tion without adding excessive overhead to the system? The second is control: how can we run processes efficiently while retaining control over the CPU? Control is particularly important to the OS, as it is in charge of resources; without control, a process could simply run forever and take over the machine, or access information that it should not be allowed to access. Obtaining high performance while maintaining control is thus one of the central challenges in building an operating system.


6.1 Basic Technique: Limited Direct Execution
   To make a program run as fast as one might expect, not surprisingly OS developers came up with a technique, which we call limited direct execution. The "direct execution" part of the idea is simple: just run the program directly on the CPU. Thus, when the OS wishes to start a pro- gram running, it creates a process entry for it in a process list, allocates some memory for it, loads the program code into memory (from disk), lo- cates its entry point (i.e., the main() routine or something similar), jumps

1


OS	Program
Create entry for process list Allocate memory for program Load program into memory Set up stack with argc/argv Clear registers
Execute call main()
Run main()
Execute return from main
Free memory of process Remove from process list

Figure 6.1: Direct Execution Protocol (Without Limits)

to it, and starts running the user's code. Figure 6.1 shows this basic di- rect execution protocol (without any limits, yet), using a normal call and return to jump to the program's main() and later back into the kernel.
   Sounds simple, no? But this approach gives rise to a few problems in our quest to virtualize the CPU. The first is simple: if we just run a program, how can the OS make sure the program doesn't do anything that we don't want it to do, while still running it efficiently? The second: when we are running a process, how does the operating system stop it from running and switch to another process, thus implementing the time sharing we require to virtualize the CPU?
   In answering these questions below, we'll get a much better sense of what is needed to virtualize the CPU. In developing these techniques, we'll also see where the "limited" part of the name arises from; without limits on running programs, the OS wouldn't be in control of anything and thus would be "just a library" - a very sad state of affairs for an aspiring operating system!

6.2 Problem #1: Restricted Operations
   Direct execution has the obvious advantage of being fast; the program runs natively on the hardware CPU and thus executes as quickly as one would expect. But running on the CPU introduces a problem: what if the process wishes to perform some kind of restricted operation, such as issuing an I/O request to a disk, or gaining access to more system resources such as CPU or memory?




   One approach would simply be to let any process do whatever it wants in terms of I/O and other related operations. However, doing so would prevent the construction of many kinds of systems that are desirable. For example, if we wish to build a file system that checks permissions before granting access to a file, we can't simply let any user process issue I/Os to the disk; if we did, a process could simply read or write the entire disk and thus all protections would be lost.
   Thus, the approach we take is to introduce a new processor mode, known as user mode; code that runs in user mode is restricted in what it can do. For example, when running in user mode, a process can't issue I/O requests; doing so would result in the processor raising an exception; the OS would then likely kill the process.
   In contrast to user mode is kernel mode, which the operating system (or kernel) runs in. In this mode, code that runs can do what it likes, in- cluding privileged operations such as issuing I/O requests and executing all types of restricted instructions.
   We are still left with a challenge, however: what should a user pro- cess do when it wishes to perform some kind of privileged operation, such as reading from disk? To enable this, virtually all modern hard- ware provides the ability for user programs to perform a system call. Pioneered on ancient machines such as the Atlas [K+61,L78], system calls allow the kernel to carefully expose certain key pieces of functionality to user programs, such as accessing the file system, creating and destroy- ing processes, communicating with other processes, and allocating more




memory. Most operating systems provide a few hundred calls (see the POSIX standard for details [P10]); early Unix systems exposed a more concise subset of around twenty calls.
   To execute a system call, a program must execute a special trap instruc- tion. This instruction simultaneously jumps into the kernel and raises the privilege level to kernel mode; once in the kernel, the system can now per- form whatever privileged operations are needed (if allowed), and thus do the required work for the calling process. When finished, the OS calls a special return-from-trap instruction, which, as you might expect, returns into the calling user program while simultaneously reducing the privi- lege level back to user mode.
   The hardware needs to be a bit careful when executing a trap, in that it must make sure to save enough of the caller's registers in order to be able to return correctly when the OS issues the return-from-trap instruction. On x86, for example, the processor will push the program counter, flags, and a few other registers onto a per-process kernel stack; the return-from- trap will pop these values off the stack and resume execution of the user- mode program (see the Intel systems manuals [I11] for details). Other hardware systems use different conventions, but the basic concepts are similar across platforms.
   There is one important detail left out of this discussion: how does the trap know which code to run inside the OS? Clearly, the calling process can't specify an address to jump to (as you would when making a pro- cedure call); doing so would allow programs to jump anywhere into the
kernel which clearly is a Very Bad Idea1. Thus the kernel must carefully control what code executes upon a trap.
   The kernel does so by setting up a trap table at boot time. When the machine boots up, it does so in privileged (kernel) mode, and thus is free to configure machine hardware as need be. One of the first things the OS thus does is to tell the hardware what code to run when certain excep- tional events occur. For example, what code should run when a hard- disk interrupt takes place, when a keyboard interrupt occurs, or when a program makes a system call? The OS informs the hardware of the

       1Imagine jumping into code to access a file, but just after a permission check; in fact, it is likely such an ability would enable a wily programmer to get the kernel to run arbitrary code sequences [S07]. In general, try to avoid Very Bad Ideas like this one.


OS @ boot	Hardware
(kernel mode) initialize trap table
remember address of... syscall handler


OS @ run	Hardware	Program
(kernel mode)	(user mode)
Create entry for process list Allocate memory for program Load program into memory Setup user stack with argv Fill kernel stack with reg/PC return-from-trap












Handle trap
Do work of syscall
return-from-trap







Free memory of process Remove from process list

restore regs
(from kernel stack) move to user mode jump to main




save regs
(to kernel stack) move to kernel mode jump to trap handler



restore regs
(from kernel stack) move to user mode jump to PC after trap





Run main()
...
Call system call
trap into OS










...
return from main
trap (via exit())

Figure 6.2: Limited Direct Execution Protocol
locations of these trap handlers, usually with some kind of special in- struction. Once the hardware is informed, it remembers the location of these handlers until the machine is next rebooted, and thus the hardware knows what to do (i.e., what code to jump to) when system calls and other exceptional events take place.




   To specify the exact system call, a system-call number is usually as- signed to each system call. The user code is thus responsible for placing the desired system-call number in a register or at a specified location on the stack; the OS, when handling the system call inside the trap handler, examines this number, ensures it is valid, and, if it is, executes the corre- sponding code. This level of indirection serves as a form of protection; user code cannot specify an exact address to jump to, but rather must request a particular service via number.
   One last aside: being able to execute the instruction to tell the hard- ware where the trap tables are is a very powerful capability. Thus, as you might have guessed, it is also a privileged operation. If you try to exe- cute this instruction in user mode, the hardware won't let you, and you can probably guess what will happen (hint: adios, offending program). Point to ponder: what horrible things could you do to a system if you could install your own trap table? Could you take over the machine?
   The timeline (with time increasing downward, in Figure 6.2) summa- rizes the protocol. We assume each process has a kernel stack where reg- isters (including general purpose registers and the program counter) are saved to and restored from (by the hardware) when transitioning into and out of the kernel.
   There are two phases in the limited direct execution (LDE) protocol. In the first (at boot time), the kernel initializes the trap table, and the CPU remembers its location for subsequent use. The kernel does so via a


privileged instruction (all privileged instructions are highlighted in bold). In the second (when running a process), the kernel sets up a few things (e.g., allocating a node on the process list, allocating memory) before us- ing a return-from-trap instruction to start the execution of the process; this switches the CPU to user mode and begins running the process. When the process wishes to issue a system call, it traps back into the OS, which handles it and once again returns control via a return-from-trap to the process. The process then completes its work, and returns from main(); this usually will return into some stub code which will properly exit the program (say, by calling the exit() system call, which traps into
the OS). At this point, the OS cleans up and we are done.

6.3 Problem #2: Switching Between Processes
   The next problem with direct execution is achieving a switch between processes. Switching between processes should be simple, right? The OS should just decide to stop one process and start another. What's the big deal? But it actually is a little bit tricky: specifically, if a process is running on the CPU, this by definition means the OS is not running. If the OS is not running, how can it do anything at all? (hint: it can't) While this sounds almost philosophical, it is a real problem: there is clearly no way for the OS to take an action if it is not running on the CPU. Thus we arrive at the crux of the problem.


A Cooperative Approach: Wait For System Calls
One approach that some systems have taken in the past (for example, early versions of the Macintosh operating system [M11], or the old Xerox Alto system [A79]) is known as the cooperative approach. In this style, the OS trusts the processes of the system to behave reasonably. Processes that run for too long are assumed to periodically give up the CPU so that the OS can decide to run some other task.
   Thus, you might ask, how does a friendly process give up the CPU in this utopian world? Most processes, as it turns out, transfer control of the CPU to the OS quite frequently by making system calls, for example, to open a file and subsequently read it, or to send a message to another machine, or to create a new process. Systems like this often include an explicit yield system call, which does nothing except to transfer control to the OS so it can run other processes.
   Applications also transfer control to the OS when they do something illegal. For example, if an application divides by zero, or tries to access


memory that it shouldn't be able to access, it will generate a trap to the OS. The OS will then have control of the CPU again (and likely terminate the offending process).
   Thus, in a cooperative scheduling system, the OS regains control of the CPU by waiting for a system call or an illegal operation of some kind to take place. You might also be thinking: isn't this passive approach less than ideal? What happens, for example, if a process (whether malicious, or just full of bugs) ends up in an infinite loop, and never makes a system call? What can the OS do then?

A Non-Cooperative Approach: The OS Takes Control
Without some additional help from the hardware, it turns out the OS can't do much at all when a process refuses to make system calls (or mistakes) and thus return control to the OS. In fact, in the cooperative approach, your only recourse when a process gets stuck in an infinite loop is to resort to the age-old solution to all problems in computer systems: reboot the machine. Thus, we again arrive at a subproblem of our general quest to gain control of the CPU.


   The answer turns out to be simple and was discovered by a number of people building computer systems many years ago: a timer interrupt [M+63]. A timer device can be programmed to raise an interrupt every so many milliseconds; when the interrupt is raised, the currently running process is halted, and a pre-configured interrupt handler in the OS runs. At this point, the OS has regained control of the CPU, and thus can do what it pleases: stop the current process, and start a different one.
   As we discussed before with system calls, the OS must inform the hardware of which code to run when the timer interrupt occurs; thus, at boot time, the OS does exactly that. Second, also during the boot



sequence, the OS must start the timer, which is of course a privileged operation. Once the timer has begun, the OS can thus feel safe in that control will eventually be returned to it, and thus the OS is free to run user programs. The timer can also be turned off (also a privileged opera- tion), something we will discuss later when we understand concurrency in more detail.
   Note that the hardware has some responsibility when an interrupt oc- curs, in particular to save enough of the state of the program that was running when the interrupt occurred such that a subsequent return-from- trap instruction will be able to resume the running program correctly. This set of actions is quite similar to the behavior of the hardware during an explicit system-call trap into the kernel, with various registers thus getting saved (e.g., onto a kernel stack) and thus easily restored by the return-from-trap instruction.

Saving and Restoring Context
Now that the OS has regained control, whether cooperatively via a sys- tem call, or more forcefully via a timer interrupt, a decision has to be made: whether to continue running the currently-running process, or switch to a different one. This decision is made by a part of the operating system known as the scheduler; we will discuss scheduling policies in great detail in the next few chapters.
   If the decision is made to switch, the OS then executes a low-level piece of code which we refer to as a context switch. A context switch is conceptually simple: all the OS has to do is save a few register values for the currently-executing process (onto its kernel stack, for example) and restore a few for the soon-to-be-executing process (from its kernel stack). By doing so, the OS thus ensures that when the return-from-trap instruction is finally executed, instead of returning to the process that was running, the system resumes execution of another process.
   To save the context of the currently-running process, the OS will ex- ecute some low-level assembly code to save the general purpose regis- ters, PC, and the kernel stack pointer of the currently-running process, and then restore said registers, PC, and switch to the kernel stack for the soon-to-be-executing process. By switching stacks, the kernel enters the call to the switch code in the context of one process (the one that was in- terrupted) and returns in the context of another (the soon-to-be-executing





one). When the OS then finally executes a return-from-trap instruction, the soon-to-be-executing process becomes the currently-running process. And thus the context switch is complete.
   A timeline of the entire process is shown in Figure 6.3. In this example, Process A is running and then is interrupted by the timer interrupt. The hardware saves its registers (onto its kernel stack) and enters the kernel (switching to kernel mode). In the timer interrupt handler, the OS decides to switch from running Process A to Process B. At that point, it calls the switch() routine, which carefully saves current register values (into the process structure of A), restores the registers of Process B (from its process structure entry), and then switches contexts, specifically by changing the stack pointer to use B's kernel stack (and not A's). Finally, the OS returns- from-trap, which restores B's registers and starts running it.
   Note that there are two types of register saves/restores that happen during this protocol. The first is when the timer interrupt occurs; in this case, the user registers of the running process are implicitly saved by the hardware, using the kernel stack of that process. The second is when the OS decides to switch from A to B; in this case, the kernel registers are ex- plicitly saved by the software (i.e., the OS), but this time into memory in the process structure of the process. The latter action moves the system from running as if it just trapped into the kernel from A to as if it just trapped into the kernel from B.
   To give you a better sense of how such a switch is enacted, Figure 6.4 shows the context switch code for xv6. See if you can make sense of it (you'll have to know a bit of x86, as well as some xv6, to do so). The context structures old and new are found in the old and new process's process structures, respectively.


OS @ boot	Hardware (kernel mode)
initialize trap table




start interrupt timer

remember addresses of... syscall handler
timer handler

start timer
interrupt CPU in X ms


OS @ run	Hardware	Program
(kernel mode)	(user mode)
Process A
...





Handle the trap
Call switch() routine save regs(A) ? proc t(A) restore regs(B) ? proc t(B) switch to k-stack(B)
return-from-trap (into B)

timer interrupt
save regs(A) ? k-stack(A) move to kernel mode jump to trap handler





restore regs(B) ? k-stack(B) move to user mode
jump to B's PC













Process B
...


Figure 6.3: Limited Direct Execution Protocol (Timer Interrupt)

6.4 Worried About Concurrency?
   Some of you, as attentive and thoughtful readers, may be now think- ing: "Hmm... what happens when, during a system call, a timer interrupt occurs?" or "What happens when you're handling one interrupt and an- other one happens? Doesn't that get hard to handle in the kernel?" Good questions - we really have some hope for you yet!
   The answer is yes, the OS does indeed need to be concerned as to what happens if, during interrupt or trap handling, another interrupt occurs. This, in fact, is the exact topic of the entire second piece of this book, on concurrency; we'll defer a detailed discussion until then.
   To whet your appetite, we'll just sketch some basics of how the OS handles these tricky situations. One simple thing an OS might do is dis- able interrupts during interrupt processing; doing so ensures that when one interrupt is being handled, no other one will be delivered to the CPU.


1	# void swtch(struct context *old, struct context *new);
2	#
3	# Save current register context in old
4	# and then load register context from new.
5	.globl swtch
6	swtch:
7	# Save old registers
8	movl 4(%esp), %eax # put old ptr into eax
9	popl 0(%eax)	# save the old IP
10	movl %esp, 4(%eax) # and stack
11	movl %ebx, 8(%eax) # and other registers
12	movl %ecx, 12(%eax)
13	movl %edx, 16(%eax)
14	movl %esi, 20(%eax)
15	movl %edi, 24(%eax)
16	movl %ebp, 28(%eax)
17
18	# Load new registers
19	movl 4(%esp), %eax # put new ptr into eax
20	movl 28(%eax), %ebp # restore other registers
21	movl 24(%eax), %edi
22	movl 20(%eax), %esi
23	movl 16(%eax), %edx
24	movl 12(%eax), %ecx
25	movl 8(%eax), %ebx
26	movl 4(%eax), %esp # stack is switched here
27	pushl 0(%eax)	# return addr put in place
28	ret	# finally return into new ctxt

Figure 6.4: The xv6 Context Switch Code
Of course, the OS has to be careful in doing so; disabling interrupts for too long could lead to lost interrupts, which is (in technical terms) bad.
   Operating systems also have developed a number of sophisticated locking schemes to protect concurrent access to internal data structures. This enables multiple activities to be on-going within the kernel at the same time, particularly useful on multiprocessors. As we'll see in the next piece of this book on concurrency, though, such locking can be com- plicated and lead to a variety of interesting and hard-to-find bugs.
6.5 Summary
   We have described some key low-level mechanisms to implement CPU virtualization, a set of techniques which we collectively refer to as limited direct execution. The basic idea is straightforward: just run the program you want to run on the CPU, but first make sure to set up the hardware so as to limit what the process can do without OS assistance.
This general approach is taken in real life as well. For example, those




of you who have children, or, at least, have heard of children, may be familiar with the concept of baby proofing a room: locking cabinets con- taining dangerous stuff and covering electrical sockets. When the room is thus readied, you can let your baby roam freely, secure in the knowledge that the most dangerous aspects of the room have been restricted.
   In an analogous manner, the OS "baby proofs" the CPU, by first (dur- ing boot time) setting up the trap handlers and starting an interrupt timer, and then by only running processes in a restricted mode. By doing so, the OS can feel quite assured that processes can run efficiently, only requir- ing OS intervention to perform privileged operations or when they have monopolized the CPU for too long and thus need to be switched out.
   We thus have the basic mechanisms for virtualizing the CPU in place. But a major question is left unanswered: which process should we run at a given time? It is this question that the scheduler must answer, and thus the next topic of our study.



ASIDE: KEY CPU VIRTUALIZATION TERMS (MECHANISMS)
• The CPU should support at least two modes of execution: a re- stricted user mode and a privileged (non-restricted) kernel mode.
• Typical user applications run in user mode, and use a system call
to trap into the kernel to request operating system services.
• The trap instruction saves register state carefully, changes the hard- ware status to kernel mode, and jumps into the OS to a pre-specified destination: the trap table.
• When the OS finishes servicing a system call, it returns to the user program via another special return-from-trap instruction, which re- duces privilege and returns control to the instruction after the trap that jumped into the OS.
• The trap tables must be set up by the OS at boot time, and make sure that they cannot be readily modified by user programs. All of this is part of the limited direct execution protocol which runs programs efficiently but without loss of OS control.
• Once a program is running, the OS must use hardware mechanisms to ensure the user program does not run forever, namely the timer interrupt. This approach is a non-cooperative approach to CPU scheduling.
• Sometimes the OS, during a timer interrupt or system call, might wish to switch from running the current process to a different one, a low-level technique known as a context switch.



.


References
[A79] "Alto User's Handbook" by Xerox. Xerox Palo Alto Research Center, September 1979. Available: http://history-computer.com/Library/AltoUsersHandbook.pdf. An amazing system, way ahead of its time. Became famous because Steve Jobs visited, took notes, and built Lisa and eventually Mac.
[C+04] "Microreboot - A Technique for Cheap Recovery" by G. Candea, S. Kawamoto, Y. Fujiki, G. Friedman, A. Fox. OSDI '04, San Francisco, CA, December 2004. An excellent paper pointing out how far one can go with reboot in building more robust systems.
[I11] "Intel 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer's Manual" by Volume 3A and 3B: System Programming Guide. Intel Corporation, January 2011. This is just a boring manual, but sometimes those are useful.
[K+61] "One-Level Storage System" by T. Kilburn, D.B.G. Edwards, M.J. Lanigan, F.H. Sumner. IRE Transactions on Electronic Computers, April 1962. The Atlas pioneered much of what you see in modern systems. However, this paper is not the best one to read. If you were to only read one, you might try the historical perspective below [L78].
[L78] "The Manchester Mark I and Atlas: A Historical Perspective" by S. H. Lavington. Com- munications of the ACM, 21:1, January 1978. A history of the early development of computers and the pioneering efforts of Atlas.
[M+63] "A Time-Sharing Debugging System for a Small Computer" by J. McCarthy, S. Boilen,
E. Fredkin, J. C. R. Licklider. AFIPS '63 (Spring), May, 1963, New York, USA. An early paper about time-sharing that refers to using a timer interrupt; the quote that discusses it: "The basic task of the channel 17 clock routine is to decide whether to remove the current user from core and if so to decide which user program to swap in as he goes out."
[MS96] "lmbench: Portable tools for performance analysis" by Larry McVoy and Carl Staelin. USENIX Annual Technical Conference, January 1996. A fun paper about how to measure a number of different things about your OS and its performance. Download lmbench and give it a try.
[M11] "Mac OS 9" by Apple Computer, Inc.. January 2011. Available at the following URL: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mac OS 9 . You can probably even find an OS 9 emulator out there if you want to; check it out, it's a fun little Mac!
[O90] "Why Aren't Operating Systems Getting Faster as Fast as Hardware?" by J. Ouster- hout. USENIX Summer Conference, June 1990. A classic paper on the nature of operating system performance.
[P10] "The Single UNIX Specification, Version 3" by The Open Group, May 2010. Available: http://www.unix.org/version3/. This is hard and painful to read, so probably avoid it if you can. Like, unless someone is paying you to read it. Or, you're just so curious you can't help it!
[S07] "The Geometry of Innocent Flesh on the Bone: Return-into-libc without Function Calls (on the x86)" by Hovav Shacham. CCS '07, October 2007. One of those awesome, mind-blowing ideas that you'll see in research from time to time. The author shows that if you can jump into code arbitrarily, you can essentially stitch together any code sequence you like (given a large code base); read the paper for the details. The technique makes it even harder to defend against malicious attacks, alas.


Homework (Measurement)


   In this homework, you'll measure the costs of a system call and context switch. Measuring the cost of a system call is relatively easy. For example, you could repeatedly call a simple system call (e.g., performing a 0-byte read), and time how long it takes; dividing the time by the number of iterations gives you an estimate of the cost of a system call.
   One thing you'll have to take into account is the precision and accu- racy of your timer. A typical timer that you can use is gettimeofday(); read the man page for details. What you'll see there is that gettimeofday() returns the time in microseconds since 1970; however, this does not mean that the timer is precise to the microsecond. Measure back-to-back calls
to gettimeofday() to learn something about how precise the timer re- ally is; this will tell you how many iterations of your null system-call test you'll have to run in order to get a good measurement result. If gettimeofday() is not precise enough for you, you might look into using the rdtsc instruction available on x86 machines.
   Measuring the cost of a context switch is a little trickier. The lmbench benchmark does so by running two processes on a single CPU, and set- ting up two UNIX pipes between them; a pipe is just one of many ways processes in a UNIX system can communicate with one another. The first process then issues a write to the first pipe, and waits for a read on the second; upon seeing the first process waiting for something to read from the second pipe, the OS puts the first process in the blocked state, and switches to the other process, which reads from the first pipe and then writes to the second. When the second process tries to read from the first pipe again, it blocks, and thus the back-and-forth cycle of communication continues. By measuring the cost of communicating like this repeatedly, lmbench can make a good estimate of the cost of a context switch. You can try to re-create something similar here, using pipes, or perhaps some other communication mechanism such as UNIX sockets.
   One difficulty in measuring context-switch cost arises in systems with more than one CPU; what you need to do on such a system is ensure that your context-switching processes are located on the same processor. For- tunately, most operating systems have calls to bind a process to a partic- ular processor; on Linux, for example, the sched setaffinity() call is what you're looking for. By ensuring both processes are on the same processor, you are making sure to measure the cost of the OS stopping one process and restoring another on the same CPU.








